śrīkṛṣṇa tvatpadopāsanamabhayatamaṃ baddhamithyārthadṛṣṭe-
rmartyasyārtasya manye vyapasarati bhayaṃ yena sarvātmanaiva |
yattāvat tvatpraṇītāniha bhajanavidhīnāsthito mohamārge
dhāvannapyāvṛtākṣa: skhalati na kuhaciddevadevākhilātman ||1||
śrī kṛṣṇa	O Lord Krishna!
tvat-pada-upāsanam-	Thy feets worship
abhayatamam	most fearless
baddha-mithyā-artha-dṛṣṭe:-	(for those) bound by false material things looking for
martyasya-ārtasya manye	the mortals, who are thus suffering, I believe
vyapasarati bhayaṃ	expels fear
yena sarvātmanā-eva	by which in every way only
yat-tāvat	that (devotion) then
tvat-praṇītān-iha	by Thy taught, here (in this world)
bhajana-vidhīn-āsthita:	in the methods of worship steady
moha-mārge dhāvan-	(even if) on the path of delusion, running,
api-āvṛta-ākṣa:	even (with) eyes closed
skhalati na kuhacit-	slips not at all
deva-deva-akhilātman	O Lord of Lords! O Soul of All Beings!
O Lord Krishna! I believe that the worship of Thy feet is the most fear expelling and the only refuge for those mortals who are suffering because of being deeply bound by the false material notions and wrong acceptance of ephemeral values as true. By devotion to Thee all fear is expelled, in every way, the methods of which are taught by Thee (in Bhagvad Geeta etc.). O Lord of Lords! O Soul of all Beings! A person who is steady in Thy devotion will not slip or falter even a wee bit even if he runs on the path of delusion with his eyes closed.
bhūman kāyena vācā muhurapi manasā tvadbalapreritātmā
yadyat kurve samastaṃ tadiha paratare tvayyasāvarpayāmi |
jātyāpīha śvapākastvayi nihitamana:karmavāgindriyārtha-
prāṇo viśvaṃ punīte na tu vimukhamanāstvatpadādvipravarya: ||2||
bhūman	O Supreme Being!
kāyena vācā	by body and speech
muhu:-api manasā	again also by mind
tvat-bala-prerita-ātmā	with Thy power prompted my soul
yat-yat kurve	what what( it)does
samastaṃ tat-iha	all that, here
paratare tvayi-	O All Pervading Being! To Thee
asau-arpayāmi	this (me) offers (at Thy service)
jātyā-api-iha śvapāka:-	by caste even, if here, (in this world) one is lowly
tvayi nihita-mana:-karma-	in Thee (has) resigned his mind, actions
vāk-indriyārtha-prāṇa:	speech senses and vital energies
viśvaṃ punīte na tu	(he) sanctifies the worlds, not indeed
vimukha-manā:-	indifferent minded
tvat-padāt-vipravarya:	from Thy feet, even a great Braahmin
O Supreme Being! All the actions of my body speech and mind which are prompted by Thy power, I offer and dedicate to Thee, the Supreme Spirit who are here in the form of Lord Guruvaayur. A person may be of lowly caste, but if he has resigned his mind speech senses and vital energies at Thy feet, he sanctifies the worlds. It is not so even if a person is a Braahmin and is indifferent minded towards Thee.
bhītirnāma dvitīyādbhavati nanu mana:kalpitaṃ ca dvitīyaṃ
tenaikyābhyāsaśīlo hṛdayamiha yathāśakti buddhyā nirundhyām |
māyāviddhe tu tasmin punarapi na tathā bhāti māyādhināthaṃ
taṃ tvāṃ bhaktyā mahatyā satatamanubhajanīśa bhītiṃ vijahyām ||3||
bhīti:-nāma	fear indeed
dvitīyāt-bhavati nanu	from a second (entity) arises definitely
mana:- kalpitam ca dvitīyaṃ	and mind's projection is this second
tena-aikya-abhyāsa-śīla:	therefore, on oneness practicing
hṛdayam-iha yathā-śakti	my mind here, with effort
buddhyā nirundhyām	and intelligence will control
māyā-viddhe tu	by Maaya's infliction indeed
tasmin puna:-api	in the intellect again also
na tathā bhāti	does not shine (as before)
māyā-adhināthaṃ taṃ tvām	Maaya's Master, therefore, Thee
bhaktyā mahatyā	with great Bhakti
satatam-anubhajan-īśa	constantly worshipping O Lord!
bhītiṃ vijahyām	fear (I) will overcome
The feeling of fear arises from the consciousness of a second entity-different from oneself. This consciousness of a second entity is a projection of the mind. I will try to control my mind with effort and discriminative intelligence. But when this discriminative intelligence is overpowered and inflicted by Maaya, the consciousness of oneness does not reveal itself again. Therefore, O Lord! by constantly worshipping Thee with great Bhakti, I will overcome all fear.
bhakterutpattivṛddhī tava caraṇajuṣāṃ saṅgamenaiva puṃsā-
māsādye puṇyabhājāṃ śriya iva jagati śrīmatāṃ saṅgamena |
tatsaṅgo deva bhūyānmama khalu satataṃ tanmukhādunmiṣadbhi-
stvanmāhātmyaprakārairbhavati ca sudṛḍhā bhaktiruddhūtapāpā ||4||
bhakte:-utpatti-vṛddhī	Bhakti's generation and growth
tava caraṇa-juṣāṃ	Thy feet worshipping (people)
saṅgamena-eva-puṃsām-	in association alone with such people
āsādye puṇya-bhājāṃ	is possible (to attain) for people with meritorious deeds
śriya iva jagati	wealth, just as, in this world
śrīmatāṃ saṅgamena	is (attainable) with wealthy people's association
tat-saṅga: deva	that type of association, O Lord!
bhūyāt-mama	may it come to me
khalu satataṃ	indeed always
tat-mukhāt-unmiṣadbhi:-	from this mouth's coming out
tvat-māhātmya-prakārai:-	Thy glories when narrated
bhavati ca sudṛḍhā	it (devotion) becomes more firm
bhakti:-uddhūta-pāpā	Bhakti which effaces all sins
Bhakti, devotion, is generated in people with meritorious deeds and it grows by association with people who are always worshipping at Thy feet. Just as in this world, wealth and prosperity are generated by association with prosperous people. O Lord! May I always have such association, because intense and firm devotion, which effaces all sins, arises as a result of listening to Thy glories and narrations of Thy sportive activities which are sung by such devotees.
śreyomārgeṣu bhaktāvadhikabahumatirjanmakarmāṇi bhūyo
gāyan kṣemāṇi nāmānyapi tadubhayata: pradrutaṃ pradrutātmā |
udyaddhāsa: kadācit kuhacidapi rudan kvāpi garjan pragāya-
nnunmādīva pranṛtyannayi kuru karuṇāṃ lokabāhyaścareyam ||5||
śreya:-mārgeṣu	among the many paths of Moksha
bhaktau-adhika-bahumati:-	in devotion there is much preference
janma-karmāṇi bhūya:	(Thy) birth and Thy deeds, again and again
gāyan kṣemāṇi nāmāni-api	singing, and Thy blessings conferring names also
tat-ubhayata:	by these both
pradrutaṃ pradrutātmā	speedily (my) mind melting (in devotion)
udyat-hāsa: kadācit	springing into laughter suddenly
kuhacit-api rudan	sometimes even crying
kvāpi garjan	at times also roaring
pragāyan-unmādī-iva	and singing around as a mad man,
pranṛtyan-	and dancing about
ayi kuru karuṇāṃ	O Thou! Bestow Thy compassion
loka-bāhya:-careyam	(so that) I may move out of the world
Among the many paths of liberation, the path of devotion is the most preferred. Treading this path I shall fervently sing Thy glories and Thy deeds in Thy various incarnations, and also chant Thy grace conferring names. I may burst into laughter or cry suddenly, or at times roar or sing and dance about like a mad man. O Thou! bestow Thy compassion so that going on the path of Bhakti I may move about at will and not have to follow the world and its social norms.
bhūtānyetāni bhūtātmakamapi sakalaṃ pakṣimatsyān mṛgādīn
martyān mitrāṇi śatrūnapi yamitamatistvanmayānyānamāni |
tvatsevāyāṃ hi siddhyenmama tava kṛpayā bhaktidārḍhyaṃ virāga-
stvattattvasyāvabodho'pi ca bhuvanapate yatnabhedaṃ vinaiva ||6||
bhūtāni-etāni	the( five) elements, these
bhūtātmakam-api sakalaṃ	everything comprising of these five elements also
pakṣi-matsyān	birds, fishes
mṛgādīn martyān	animals etc., and mortals
mitrāṇi śatrūn-api	friends and enemies also
yamita-mati:-	with a balanced mind
tvat-mayāni-ānamāni	(knowing to be ) Thy forms, saluting
tvat-sevāyāṃ hi	in Thy service (worship) only
siddhyet-mama	will be achieved by me
tava kṛpayā	with Thy grace
bhakti-dārḍhyaṃ	in devotion firmness
virāga:-tvat-tattvasya-	dispassion, and Thy true nature's
avabodha:-api	knowledge also
ca bhuvanapate	and O Lord of the Universe!
yatnabhedaṃ vinā-eva	without separate effort for each
I shall salute the five elements, everything comprising of the elements, fishes, birds, animals and other mortals, friends and enemies with the knowledge that they are all Thy forms alone. Thus with my mind balanced with Bhakti I will always be in Thy service and worship Thee. With Thy grace then I will achieve firm devotion, dispassion and the knowledge of the Truth in Reality, simultaneously and will not have to make an effort to achieve each one separately. (Just as swallowing a morsel of food gives the satisfaction of enjoyment, strength and appeasing of hunger).
no muhyan kṣuttṛḍādyairbhavasaraṇibhavaistvannilīnāśayatvā-
ccintāsātatyaśālī nimiṣalavamapi tvatpadādaprakampa: |
iṣṭāniṣṭeṣu tuṣṭivyasanavirahito māyikatvāvabodhā-
jjyotsnābhistvannakhendoradhikaśiśiritenātmanā sañcareyam ||7||
no muhyan	not misled
kṣut-tṛḍā-ādyai:-	by hunger thirst etc.,
bhava-saraṇi-bhavai:-	the universe's string of manifestations
tvat-nilīna-āśayatvāt-	(because of) in Thee engrossed my mind
cintā-sātatyaśālī	ever meditating
nimiṣalavam-api	for a fraction of a second also
tvat-padāt-aprakampa:	from Thy feet not deviating
iṣṭa-aniṣṭeṣu	from good or bad
tuṣṭi-vyasana-virahita:	gratification and aversion indifferent
māyikatva-avabodhāt	(these are) effects of Maayaa, with this knowledge
jyotsnābhi:-	in the cool rays
tvat-nakha-indo:-	of Thy toe nail's moon's
adhika-śiśiritena-	very well cooled
ātmanā sañcareyam	mind, I shall move about
The strings of sufferings created by the universe like hunger and thirst will not effect me because my mind will be engrossed in Thee. I shall constantly meditate on Thy feet, and will not deviate even for a fraction of a second from them. With the knowledge that good and bad and gratification and aversion are an effect of Maayaa I will be indifferent to them. I shall move about peacefully with my mind being cooled in the cool light of the moon of Thy toe-nails.
bhūteṣveṣu tvadaikyasmṛtisamadhigatau nādhikāro'dhunā ce-
ttvatprema tvatkamaitrī jaḍamatiṣu kṛpā dviṭsu bhūyādupekṣā |
arcāyāṃ vā samarcākutukamurutaraśraddhayā vardhatāṃ me
tvatsaṃsevī tathāpi drutamupalabhate bhaktalokottamatvam ||8||
bhūteṣu-eṣu tvat-aikya-	in all these beings, Thy oneness
smṛti-samadhigatau	(this) memory in achieving
na-adhikāra:-adhunā cet-	my right, if not, at present is there
tvat-prema tvatka-maitrī	for Thee love, for Thy people friendship
jaḍamatiṣu kṛpā	towards ignorant people kindness
dviṭsu bhūyāt-upekṣā	towards enemies may there be indifference
arcāyāṃ vā	or towards Thy images
samarcā-kutukam-urutara-	the eagerness to worship may greatly
śraddhayā vardhatāṃ me	with faith increase in me
tvat-saṃsevī tathāpi	Thy worshipper, in this manner also
drutam-upalabhate	soon attains
bhakta-loka-uttamatvam	in the world of devotees high status
It may be that I do not deserve now the experience of the knowledge of Thy oneness with all beings. May I have love for Thee and friendliness for Thy people, kindness for the ignorant, indifference towards the enemies. Or may I have the eagerness to worship Thy images with full faith. People who worship Thee in such a manner, also, without delay attain the highest pinnacle of divine love.
āvṛtya tvatsvarūpaṃ kṣitijalamarudādyātmanā vikṣipantī
jīvān bhūyiṣṭhakarmāvalivivaśagatīn du:khajāle kṣipantī |
tvanmāyā mābhibhūnmāmayi bhuvanapate kalpate tatpraśāntyai
tvatpāde bhaktirevetyavadadayi vibho siddhayogī prabuddha: ||9||
āvṛtya tvat-svarūpaṃ	hiding Thy real nature
kṣiti-jala-marut-ādi-	earth,water,air,etc.
ātmanā vikṣipantī	itself (in these forms) projecting
jīvān bhūyiṣṭha-karmāvali-	on the embodied souls, their string of actions
vivaśa-gatīn	helplessly, (their resulted) reactions
du:kha-jāle kṣipantī	in the sufferings' net throwing
tvat-māyā	Thy Maayaa
mā-abhibhūt-mām-	may it not overpower me
ayi bhuvanapate	O Thou Lord of the Universe!
kalpate tat-praśāntyai	is considered to overcome it
tvat-pāde bhakti:-eva-	in Thy feet devotion alone
iti-avadat-	thus said
ayi vibho	O All Pervading Being!
siddha-yogī prabuddha:	the enlightened Yogi named Prabuddha
Thy Maayaa by projecting itself as earth water air and other elements conceals Thy real nature. More over, it throws the embodied souls helplessly into a network of worldly sufferings based on the reactions created by their good or bad actions. O Lord of Universe! May that Maayaa not overpower me. O All pervading Being! the enlightened Yogi Prabuddha has said that this Thy Maayaa can be overcome only by devotion at Thy feet.
du:khānyālokya jantuṣvalamuditaviveko'hamācāryavaryā-
llabdhvā tvadrūpatattvaṃ guṇacaritakathādyudbhavadbhaktibhūmā |
māyāmenāṃ taritvā paramasukhamaye tvatpade moditāhe
tasyāyaṃ pūrvaraṅga: pavanapurapate nāśayāśeṣarogān ||10||
du:khāni-ālokya jantuṣu-	sufferings seeing in all beings
alam-udita-viveka:-	indeed obtaining discrimination
aham-ācāryavaryāt-	I from the great spiritual master
labdhvā tvat-rūpa-tatvaṃ	receiving Thy nature's reality and (being instructed)
guṇa-carita-kathā-ādi-	in Thy excellences glories and deeds
udbhavat-bhakti-bhūmā	and with arising of devotion supreme
māyām-enāṃ-taritvā	this Maayaa crossing over
parama-sukhamaye-tvatpade	supreme bliss conferring, Thy feet
moditāhe	may give me delight
tasya-ayaṃ-pūrva:-aṅga:	(to achieve this) for it this is the first step
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
nāśaya-aśeṣa-rogān	remove my numerous ailments
As I have been able to see the miseries of the creatures, in this world, by obtaining an insight due to a discriminative mind, may I be blessed with the instructions from a great spiritual master. From his instructions, may I receive the knowledge of Thy real nature, by the narrations of Thy excellences, glories and deeds will arise supreme devotion, by which crossing over Maayaa, at Thy feet that supreme bliss will be conferred on me which will give me great delight. To achieve this, this is the first step. O Lord! of Guruvaayur! remove my numerous ailments.